{% raw %}<ul>
<li>This publication includes IP from RxNorm. Using RxNorm codes of type SAB=RXNORM as this specification describes does not require  a UMLS license. Access to the full set of RxNorm definitions, and/or additional use of other RxNorm structures and information requires a UMLS license. The use of RxNorm in this specification is pursuant to HL7's status as a licensee of the NLM UMLS. HL7's license does not convey the right to use RxNorm to any users of this specification; implementers must acquire a license to use RxNorm in their own right.</p>
</li>
<li>This publication includes IP from LOINC. This material contains content from <a href="http://loinc.org">LOINC</a. LOINC is copyright © 1995-2020, Regenstrief Institute, Inc. and the Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC) Committee and is available at no cost under the <a href="http://loinc.org/license">license</a>. LOINC® is a registered United States trademark of Regenstrief Institute, Inc.</li>
<li>This publication includes IP from SNOMED Clinical Terms® (SNOMED CT®). This content from  which is copyright of SNOMED International. Implementers of these specifications must have the appropriate SNOMED CT Affiliate license - for more information contact <a href="http://www.snomed.org/snomed-ct/get-snomed-ct">http://www.snomed.org/snomed-ct/get-snomed-ct</a> or <a href="mailto:info@snomed.org">info@snomed.org</a>.</li>
<li>This publication includes IP from PH_VaccinesAdministeredCVX_CDC_NIP. Copyright HL7. Licensed under creative commons public domain</p>
</li>
</ul>
{% endraw %}