{% raw %} <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyAllergyIntolerance.json.html">MyAllergyIntolerance</a> <p>An example profile of the AllergyIntolerance resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyBodyStructure.json.html">MyBodyStructure</a> <p>An example profile of the BodyStructure resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCarePlan.json.html">MyCarePlan</a> <p>An example profile of the CarePlan resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCareTeam.json.html">MyCareTeam</a> <p>An example profile of the CareTeam resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCommunication.json.html">MyCommunication</a> <p>An example profile of the Communication resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCondition.json.html">MyCondition</a> <p>An example profile of the Condition resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyConsent.json.html">MyConsent</a> <p>An example profile of the Consent resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyDevice.json.html">MyDevice</a> <p>An example profile of the Device resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyDiagnosticReport.json.html">MyDiagnosticReport</a> <p>An example profile of the DiagnosticReport resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyFamilyMemberHistory.json.html">MyFamilyMemberHistory</a> <p>An example profile of the FamilyMemberHistory resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyGoal.json.html">MyGoal</a> <p>An example profile of the Goal resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyImmunization.json.html">MyImmunization</a> <p>An example profile of the Immunization resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyMedication.json.html">MyMedication</a> <p>An example profile of the Medication resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyMedicationStatement.json.html">MyMedicationStatement</a> <p>An example profile of the MedicationStatement resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyMolecularSequence.json.html">MyMolecularSequence</a> <p>An example profile of the MolecularSequence resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyObservation.json.html">MyObservation</a> <p>An example profile of the Observation resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyPatient.json.html">MyPatient</a> <p>An example profile of the Patient resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyPractitioner.json.html">MyPractitioner</a> <p>An example profile of the Practitioner resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyProcedure.json.html">MyProcedure</a> <p>An example profile of the Procedure resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyRelatedPerson.json.html">MyRelatedPerson</a> <p>An example profile of the RelatedPerson resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MySpecimen.json.html">MySpecimen</a> <p>An example profile of the Specimen resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-Environmental.json.html">Environmental</a> <p>An example profile of the Environmental resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-HealthReceipt.json.html">HealthReceipt</a> <p>An example profile of the HealthReceipt resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-NutrientIntake.json.html">NutrientIntake</a> <p>An example profile of the NutrientIntake resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-NutrientOuttake.json.html">NutrientOuttake</a> <p>An example profile of the NutrientOuttake resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-SocialMedia.json.html">SocialMedia</a> <p>An example profile of the SocialMedia resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-VitalSigns.json.html">VitalSigns</a> <p>An example profile of the VitalSigns resource.</p>
</li>
{% endraw %}