{% raw %} <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyAllergyIntolerance.xml.html">MyAllergyIntolerance</a> <p>An example profile of the AllergyIntolerance resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCarePlan.xml.html">MyCarePlan</a> <p>An example profile of the CarePlan resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCareTeam.xml.html">MyCareTeam</a> <p>An example profile of the CareTeam resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCommunication.xml.html">MyCommunication</a> <p>An example profile of the Communication resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCondition.xml.html">MyCondition</a> <p>An example profile of the Condition resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyConsent.xml.html">MyConsent</a> <p>An example profile of the Consent resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyDevice.xml.html">MyDevice</a> <p>An example profile of the Device resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyFamilyMemberHistory.xml.html">MyFamilyMemberHistory</a> <p>An example profile of the FamilyMemberHistory resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyGoal.xml.html">MyGoal</a> <p>An example profile of the Goal resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyImagingStudy.xml.html">MyImagingStudy</a> <p>An example profile of the ImagingStudy resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyImmunization.xml.html">MyImmunization</a> <p>An example profile of the Immunization resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyMedication.xml.html">MyMedication</a> <p>An example profile of the Medication resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyMedicationStatement.xml.html">MyMedicationStatement</a> <p>An example profile of the MedicationStatement resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyObservation.xml.html">MyObservation</a> <p>An example profile of the Observation resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyPatient.xml.html">MyPatient</a> <p>An example profile of the Patient resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyPractitioner.xml.html">MyPractitioner</a> <p>An example profile of the Practitioner resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyProcedure.xml.html">MyProcedure</a> <p>An example profile of the Procedure resource.</p>
</li>
 <li><a href="StructureDefinition-MyRelatedPerson.xml.html">MyRelatedPerson</a> <p>An example profile of the RelatedPerson resource.</p>
</li>
{% endraw %}