{% raw %} <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrAllergyIntolerance.xml.html">PhrAllergyIntolerance</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the AllergyIntolerance resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrBodyStructure.xml.html">PhrBodyStructure</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the BodyStructure resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrCarePlan.xml.html">PhrCarePlan</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the CarePlan resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrCareTeam.xml.html">PhrCareTeam</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the CareTeam resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrCommunication.xml.html">PhrCommunication</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Communication resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrCondition.xml.html">PhrCondition</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Condition resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrConsent.xml.html">PhrConsent</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Consent resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrDevice.xml.html">PhrDevice</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Device resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrDiagnosticReport.xml.html">PhrDiagnosticReport</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the DiagnosticReport resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrFamilyMemberHistory.xml.html">PhrFamilyMemberHistory</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the FamilyMemberHistory resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrGoal.xml.html">PhrGoal</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Goal resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrImmunization.xml.html">PhrImmunization</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Immunization resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrMedication.xml.html">PhrMedication</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Medication resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrMedicationStatement.xml.html">PhrMedicationStatement</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the MedicationStatement resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrMolecularSequence.xml.html">PhrMolecularSequence</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the MolecularSequence resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrObservation.xml.html">PhrObservation</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Observation resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrPatient.xml.html">PhrPatient</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Patient resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrPractitioner.xml.html">PhrPractitioner</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Practitioner resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrProcedure.xml.html">PhrProcedure</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Procedure resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrRelatedPerson.xml.html">PhrRelatedPerson</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the RelatedPerson resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-PhrSpecimen.xml.html">PhrSpecimen</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Specimen resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-Environmental.xml.html">Environmental</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the Environmental resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-HealthReceipt.xml.html">HealthReceipt</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the HealthReceipt resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-NutrientIntake.xml.html">NutrientIntake</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the NutrientIntake resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-NutrientOuttake.xml.html">NutrientOuttake</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the NutrientOuttake resource.</p>
</td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-SocialMedia.xml.html">SocialMedia</a> </td><td><p>Standard PHR profile of the SocialMedia resource.</p>
</td></tr>
{% endraw %}