{% raw %} <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyAllergyIntolerance.html">MyAllergyIntolerance</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the AllergyIntolerance resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyBodyStructure.html">MyBodyStructure</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the BodyStructure resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCarePlan.html">MyCarePlan</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the CarePlan resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCareTeam.html">MyCareTeam</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the CareTeam resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCommunication.html">MyCommunication</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Communication resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyCondition.html">MyCondition</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Condition resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyConsent.html">MyConsent</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Consent resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyDevice.html">MyDevice</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Device resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyDiagnosticReport.html">MyDiagnosticReport</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the DiagnosticReport resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyFamilyMemberHistory.html">MyFamilyMemberHistory</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the FamilyMemberHistory resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyGoal.html">MyGoal</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Goal resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyImagingStudy.html">MyImagingStudy</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the ImagingStudy resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyImmunization.html">MyImmunization</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Immunization resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyMedication.html">MyMedication</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Medication resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyMedicationStatement.html">MyMedicationStatement</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the MedicationStatement resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyMolecularSequence.html">MyMolecularSequence</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the MolecularSequence resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyObservation.html">MyObservation</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Observation resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyPatient.html">MyPatient</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Patient resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyPractitioner.html">MyPractitioner</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Practitioner resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyProcedure.html">MyProcedure</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Procedure resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MyRelatedPerson.html">MyRelatedPerson</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the RelatedPerson resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
 <tr><td><a href="StructureDefinition-MySpecimen.html">MySpecimen</a> </td><td><p>An example profile of the Specimen resource.</p>
</td><td></td></tr>
{% endraw %}